my my it's wet out here
in 2016 scientists decided to study the
whitest part of the atlantic ocean
between africa and south america it's
kind of lonely there
they went days without seeing a single
plane or ship
it was mostly just dolphins and whales
swimming by
they were in the middle of nowhere so
why
they were floating right above one of
the most important geological spots on
earth
the mid-atlantic ridge it's where two
monster tectonic plates meet
tectonic plates are massive jigsaw
pieces that are constantly moving
even though we usually can't feel them
they form the earth's crust
and in this case meet beneath the
atlantic ocean
the researchers floated over the ridge
and dropped down some instruments that
detect waves
earthquakes and other vibrations a year
later
they came back to collect the results at
first
the goal was to learn more about the
history of the two plates
but the instruments picked up a whole
lot more than that
they found out some stuff about the
future too
way down at the bottom there's a layer
of extremely hot liquid rock
that's constantly rising up pushing on
the tectonic plates and causing them to
move apart from each other
that means that the atlantic ocean is
expanding about two inches
every year pushing europe and africa
away from the americas
at the same time its bigger neighbor the
pacific ocean
is shrinking it's the biggest ocean
right now
with a huge area that's around 30
percent of the earth's surface
its average depth is 13 000 feet and is
home to the famous
mariana trench the deepest spot in any
ocean
and yeah it's now shrinking by around
one-fifth of a square mile per year
some scientists even believe that
eventually millions and millions of
years from now
the pacific ocean could completely
disappear
this ocean is where we think most
earthquakes happen
plus it's where a lot of the world's
volcanoes are
all that causes lots of shaking plates
move around and old parts of the earth's
crust
get destroyed the ocean floor can't grow
fast enough to replace it
this means some big changes are coming
in the future
a couple of inches isn't exactly a big
deal but after a few hundred million
years
they'll probably be a new super
continent on earth
australia is slowly heading north and it
could eventually collide with korea
japan and eastern china africa is moving
too
in 50 million years it'll be pushing
right up against the southern parts of
europe
since it's all happening so slowly i've
had a chance to think up some future
scenarios
okay not me a bunch of super brainy
scientists with even brainier computers
the first scenario a monster land mass
called
novo the americas would slam into
antarctica
then they'd team up and head over to
africa meanwhile
africa would have already smashed into
europe and asia
not bad at least you'd save some money
on plane tickets but for most people
it would take an epic road trip to get
to a beach somewhere
the second scenario is ultima i feel
like these all sound like car names
anyway in this scenario the atlantic
stops getting wider
actually is the opposite it starts
closing in on itself
this new super cool continent would be
surrounded by the pacific ocean
scenario three orica both the atlantic
and pacific oceans eventually shrink
down
until they either disappear or end up
like tiny little lakes
all the life in these two oceans is gone
instead
some new ocean starts forming to replace
them and the new super continent
it has australia in the corner with the
americans and east asia
each on the opposite side of a small
puddle that used to be the pacific
the rest of the planet is one big
unexplored super ocean
inhabited by who knows i won't be around
that
number four amnesia there's that car
thing again
this one predicts africa australia and
all the continents
except antarctica start moving north
sorry antarctica
even planet earth keeps forgetting about
you better luck next time
well way off in the future it might be
possible to take a big old road trip
across every continent
or drive across the african south
american border
or even get to australia without having
to take the longest flight of your life
but we've got a while to wait what
should i do for the next 250 million
years
binge watch some bright side tectonic
plates move at different speeds
some slower some slightly faster your
hair and fingernails actually grow at
roughly the same speed as these beasts
move
imagine if everyone lived on one of
those super continents
animals would finally be able to cross
continents and meet species they've
never seen before
leopards rhinos lions elephants imagine
if they got curious enough to set out on
a journey out of their habitat
a lion might meet a polar bear kangaroos
could finally leave the land down under
and birds that migrate to warmer places
would have to totally reorganize their
travel schedules
who knows what the climate would be like
playing around with the continental
jigsaw puzzle isn't exactly a new thing
our world didn't always look like this
300 million years ago
our planet didn't have seven continents
it had
only one a super continent called
pangaea
pangea was surrounded by only one ocean
over time
it slowly started falling apart at one
point
south america antarctica australia and
africa were one unit
and north america and eurasia were
another over time
these continents also splintered off
each heading in its own direction
scientists have discovered many similar
plants and animal fossils on continents
that are separated by huge oceans
even when you just glance at a map you
can see how africa
and south america look like two massive
puzzle pieces that fit together
perfectly
when you look at all the oceans and seas
on a map it may look like they just flow
right into each other
like there's only one big ocean and
people gave different names to different
parts
you wouldn't think that if you've ever
been to the place where they meet
the atlantic and pacific have a strict
border that looks like an invisible wall
separating two completely different
worlds
you can clearly see different colors and
waters and they don't mix
of course there's no wall or any actual
physical border
but not all waters the same
the pacific and atlantic have different
densities amounts of salt
temperatures and a whole bunch of
differences the borders that separate
two bodies of water are called
ocean clines the line you see dividing
the atlantic and pacific ocean
is mostly caused by different salt
levels this is what
layers of water with different salt
levels look like it's like they're
separated with cling film
each one with a different color because
it has different things growing in it
to see a clear noticeable border one sea
or ocean
has to be a whole lot saltier than the
other want to get active and use up
all the salt in your house pour some
colored salty water or seawater into a
glass bowl
then add fresh water on top voila
the pacific ocean is the less salty one
that's because there are loads more
rivers flowing into it heavier liquids
are heavy so they should sink to the
bottom but then
why is the border between the atlantic
and pacific
a vertical line and not a horizontal one
first the difference in density of these
two salty beasts may be enough
to stop them from mixing but it's not
really enough to send one of them to the
bottom with the other floating above it
there's another reason and it's all
about the earth spinning around
say you're flying from chile to new
england if you fly straight
north by the time you get there the
earth will have turned a bit
and you'd be nowhere near your
destination to get to the right place
the pilot needs to fly in a bit of a
curve
that's sort of the same reason that
currents move around in different
directions
the currents in the atlantic and pacific
oceans move away from each other
so they don't really mix at their border
even though they're both just
water confused yeah me too